The next upgrade: enforce exam block roles, not just block kinds
You already started down this path with shape contracts and decision-density. Good.
To make it reliably exam-cram, enforce required semantic blocks per section:
Pathophysiology section must include, in the blocks themselves:
Recognition Cues (list)
Red Flags (callout/list)
First Actions (steps)
Exam Traps (callout/list)
Differential Table (table)
Not optional, not “maybe present.” Required.
How to enforce this without NLP
Use required headings / labels in blocks:
bullets/callout must contain one of:
“Recognition cues”
“Red flags”
“First actions”
“Exam traps”
“Don’t confuse with”
Then validate that those labels exist somewhere in that section’s blocks.
This is a cheap and extremely effective contract.
Prompt fix (most important)
Right now your prompts allow “Pathophysiology of HF” as a heading and then a paragraph. That will pass every structural validator.
Add this to CONTENT_RULES (top of every section prompt):
This section MUST include the following labeled blocks (use these exact labels):
- Recognition cues:
- Red flags:
- First actions (in order):
- Exam traps:
- Don’t confuse with: (table)

If any label is missing, the output is invalid.
Now you’ll stop getting “textbook paragraph” as the main output.
Validation fix (second)
Add checks like:
hasLabel("Recognition cues")
hasLabel("Red flags")
hasLabel("First actions")
hasLabel("Exam traps")
hasTableLabel("Don’t confuse with")
Fail the section if missing any label.
This makes “exam cram” deterministic.
Quick assessment of the “gotcha fixes” you claimed
You said:
list detection items-based ✅ (good)
table qualification adds cell char minimum ✅ (good)
decision verb counting scans all text ✅ (good)
pharmacology keywords expanded ✅ (fine)
Those are all correct design choices. The only thing missing is: show the actual diff, because “Above” isn’t verifiable.
What I need from you (minimum) to confirm code correctness
Paste the actual diff hunk for validateSection (just that function) from server/routes.ts. Nothing else.
If you can’t easily get it, paste the function body as plain text.
Then I can tell you:
whether your counting logic will miscount tables/lists
whether rows.flat() will explode if rows are objects
whether decision verb matching is too permissive or too strict
whether your “shape contract” can be bypassed
Bottom line
You’re past the “no information appears” phase. The system is now producing content.
The new problem is: it’s producing content the student won’t pay for.
The fastest way to fix that is not more thresholds; it’s semantic block requirements (Recognition cues / Red flags / First actions / Exam traps / Differential).
If you want, I can write the exact prompt + validator rules for each section type (Patho / Pharm / Assessment / Interventions) so every generated section looks like an exam cram sheet by default.