Why your guide ends up with “no information”
Your AI prompt requires JSON, but it never tells the model what the section IDs must be.
Your prompt literally says:
{"sections":[{"id":"section-id","title":"Section Title","blocks":[...]}] ... }
…but it does not provide the required IDs like:
learning-objectives
pathophysiology
signs-and-symptoms
etc.
Then, during compile, you do:
const sec = sectionMap[step.sectionId];
if (sec?.blocks?.length > 0) render...
So if the model returns IDs like "Pathophysiology" or "Patho" or "Learning Objectives" (human labels), your sectionMap["pathophysiology"] is undefined → nothing renders → you get divider pages only.
You have a fallback fuzzy match, but it’s weak (and it only runs if it finds a matching title). If the model returns unexpected titles/ids or nested shapes, you still get empty.
Bonus: your question rendering drops rationales entirely
Even when questions exist, your compile builds qBlocks with stem + options only. No correct or rationale blocks are added, so it looks like garbage even when the model returned them.
The fix (what to change in code)
You need to enforce a strict blueprint skeleton in the prompt (IDs + order), and you need a normalizer as a safety net.
Fix A — Force exact section IDs in the prompt (most important)
In buildAIPrompt(examCtx) add this to the prompt:
a list of exact section IDs expected
an explicit rule: IDs must match exactly
an explicit skeleton the model must fill
Example (you can paste this into your prompt builder):
YOU MUST RETURN THESE SECTIONS WITH THESE EXACT IDS (no changes, no extra):
- learning-objectives
- pathophysiology
- signs-and-symptoms
- assessment-findings
- labs-and-diagnostics
- medications
- nursing-interventions
- complications
- patient-teaching

Return sections in that order.
Each section must have >= 3 blocks.
Even better: provide the exact JSON skeleton (with empty blocks) and tell it to fill it.
Fix B — Normalize IDs before compiling (safety net)
Right after you build sectionMap, normalize incoming sec.id into your slug format, e.g.:
lower-case
spaces → hyphens
remove punctuation
Then store both raw and normalized.
This prevents “Pathophysiology” vs “pathophysiology” from killing your render.
Fix C — Hard fail if required sections are missing
Before you loop bp.pageFlow, do:
compute missing section IDs
if any missing → throw and show an error instead of compiling empty pages
Fix D — Render rationales (or don’t claim you have them)
In the questions step, add:
correct answer
rationale
optional “trap note”
Right now you’re not rendering them at all.
The exact Replit AI prompt to reprogram it (copy/paste)
This will fix the “empty guide” problem at its source.
Stop narrating. Output diffs.

File to edit: client/src/pages/product-builder.tsx

Bug: AI-generated guides compile with cover/TOC/dividers but sections are empty because AI output section IDs don’t match bp.pageFlow sectionIds. The prompt does not specify the required section ids, so sectionMap[step.sectionId] is undefined.

Fix requirements:

1) Update buildAIPrompt() to enforce an exact section ID contract.
   - Include the exact list of required section IDs used by TEMPLATE_BLUEPRINTS/pageFlow:
     learning-objectives
     pathophysiology
     signs-and-symptoms
     assessment-findings
     labs-and-diagnostics
     medications
     nursing-interventions
     complications
     patient-teaching
   - Add a strict rule: section.id must match exactly (no label casing, no spaces).
   - Provide a JSON skeleton with those ids and require the model to fill it.
   - Keep JSON-only requirement.

2) Add section id normalization as a safety net after fetching AI data:
   - Normalize incoming sec.id and also index by normalized id.
   - Example normalization: lowercase, trim, spaces/underscores -> hyphen, strip non-alphanum/hyphen.
   - When compiling sections, try exact match first, then normalized match.

3) Add a pre-compile validation gate:
   - Before looping bp.pageFlow, verify each required sectionId exists and has >=3 blocks.
   - If not, throw a hard error and surface a UI message listing missing/empty sections.

4) Fix question rendering:
   - In the questions step, render correct answer + rationale if present.
   - If includeQuestions is enabled and the API returns questions with rationales, show them.

Deliver:
- Unified diff for product-builder.tsx only.
- 3 bullet test steps.
No narration.