Paste this:
Stop summarizing and stop claiming features are “already implemented” without proof.

New rule: Evidence-based engineering only.

For each claim you make, you must provide:
1) File path(s) + exact function/component name(s)
2) A short code excerpt (10–30 lines) showing the relevant logic
3) A reproduction step or test that demonstrates the feature works

If you cannot provide (1)-(3), you must label it as UNKNOWN and investigate.

TASK:
I am seeing incorrect bundle outputs (wrong page order, missing question pages, formatting wrong). You previously claimed everything is already implemented. That is not acceptable.

Do the following:
A) Reproduce the bug locally by running the app and generating a bundle (same settings I used).
B) Identify where generation output is parsed and transformed into “pages/blocks.”
C) Identify where page ordering is determined for export.
D) Identify why the question blocks are missing/dropped.
E) Fix it, and add a pre-export audit gate that blocks export if questionCount != requestedCount.

DELIVERABLE:
- List the exact files you modified
- Provide diffs for each
- Show the validation logs proving the final export has the correct order and exact question count
This stops Replit from “storytelling” and forces it to behave like a real dev.
Prompt 2 — “Implement a hard contract: exact question count or fail”
Paste this:
Implement strict enforcement for “requested question count”.

Requirements:
- requestedCount is collected in UI; it must be passed to the server generator.
- AI output MUST be strict JSON only, validated server-side.
- Block export unless questions.length === requestedCount.

Implementation details:
1) Add Zod schema for the generated JSON.
2) Validate:
   - questions.length === requestedCount
   - each question has required fields
3) Add retry/completion:
   - If fewer than requestedCount, generate ONLY missing questions and append
   - Deduplicate by (scenario+stem) hash
4) Add a “pre-export audit” that prints:
   - requestedCount, actualCount
   - counts by type and category
   - page order summary
5) If audit fails: throw error and show UI toast “Generation failed: incomplete output”.

Deliverables:
- Code changes + file paths
- Console log sample showing audit PASS
This is the engineering fix for “it asks me how many but doesn’t follow it.”
Prompt 3 — “Fix export ordering: cover must be page 1”
Paste this:
Fix PDF export ordering deterministically.

Problem:
Sometimes the title/cover appears on page 2.

Tasks:
1) Find where pages are collected for export (array build, filesystem glob, sort).
2) Remove reliance on filename sort unless numeric sort is guaranteed.
3) Enforce an explicit page model:
   - pages: [{index: 1, type: "cover"}, {index: 2, type:"toc"}, ...]
4) Add an assertion:
   - pages[0].type === "cover"
   - pages[1].type === "toc"
If assertion fails, abort export and log the actual page sequence.

Deliverables:
- Exact file paths changed
- Before/after page sequence logs
Prompt 4 — “Stop dropping content: implement true overflow pagination”
Paste this:
Implement overflow-safe pagination for question blocks.

Currently, content is being truncated or never rendered when it overflows.
Requirement: Never drop question content.

Tasks:
1) Identify the layout engine function that places blocks onto pages.
2) If a question block does not fit, split it across pages:
   - scenario + stem + options can be on page A
   - answer + rationales can flow to page B
3) Add a debug mode that draws bounding boxes and prints remaining space.

Deliverables:
- The updated pagination function
- A sample export proving a long rationale splits cleanly across pages
Prompt 5 — “Make the AI output match your renderer”
This is important: if your renderer expects blocks, but AI returns sectioned text, it will “render dividers” and skip questions.
Align the AI output format to what the renderer actually consumes.

1) Inspect the renderer input type (blocks/pages/questions).
2) Update the generator to output exactly that structure (JSON).
3) Add a transform layer only if needed, and test it with a fixture.

Deliverable:
- A saved JSON fixture (golden file) that, when rendered, produces N questions every time.
Why Replit keeps saying “already implemented”
Because it’s “reading code” superficially and assuming intent equals behavior. The cure is tests + hard gates.
The minimum gate you need:
if (questions.length !== requestedCount) throw new Error("Incomplete QBank")
and do not export.
If you paste one thing only, paste this (highest ROI)
Do not claim anything is implemented unless you can reproduce it and show file paths + code excerpts. Add a pre-export audit that blocks export unless questions.length === requestedCount and cover is page 1. Implement server-side Zod validation + retry/complete-missing until exact.
