What Is Actually Happening
1️⃣ Your model is capped by max_tokens
If max_tokens is something small like 300–500, the model will:
• Generate header
• Start formatting
• Hit token ceiling
• Stop
And since structured formatting consumes tokens quickly, it dies after the first page.
2️⃣ You are using streaming and cutting it off
If your frontend:
onStreamChunk(chunk) {
  setContent(chunk)
}
Instead of accumulating:
setContent(prev => prev + chunk)
You will only see the first part.
3️⃣ You are overwriting content on each chunk
Common bug:
editor.setContent(chunk)
Instead of:
editor.setContent(existing + chunk)
Result: Only the first chunk remains visible.
4️⃣ Your API call is truncated server-side
If you’re using something like:
max_tokens: 500
That’s too small for 2,500+ word output.
You need something closer to:
max_tokens: 4000
Or switch to a model that handles larger outputs.
This Is Why Prompt Tweaks Won’t Fix It
No matter how good your instructions are, the model physically cannot generate more than the token limit you set.
You are hitting an architectural ceiling.
Immediate Fix Checklist
Ask Replit AI to:
Increase max_tokens to 4000+
Ensure streaming accumulates content
Log response length in console
Confirm response is not being truncated before insertion
Confirm editor supports large inserts
Copy This Debug Prompt Into Your Dev AI
I need to debug my AI generator.
Problem:
When generating long structured content (2,000+ words), only the title page appears in the document. The rest is missing.
Tasks:
Check if max_tokens is set too low.
Increase max_tokens to at least 4000.
If using streaming, ensure chunks are appended instead of overwritten.
Log total token usage and response length.
Ensure the full AI response is returned before inserting into the editor.
Confirm the editor is not truncating long content.
Add temporary console.log(response.length) before insertion.
Do not modify UI. Only debug the generation pipeline.
Quick Test You Can Run
Change your generator temporarily to:
Generate a 5,000 word essay about nursing.
If it still only gives one page → token or streaming issue.
If it works → your structured formatting prompt is triggering truncation.
One More Important Question
What model are you using?
gpt-4o-mini?
gpt-4o?
Something else?
And what is your current max_tokens setting?
