<p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">The cardiovascular system is a closed-loop transport network responsible for delivering oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and immune cells to tissues while removing carbon dioxide and metabolic waste. It consists of the heart as the central pump, an extensive network of blood vessels that distribute and collect blood, and approximately 5 liters of circulating blood in the average adult. Its primary purpose is to maintain adequate tissue perfusion and cellular oxygenation. When perfusion fails, organ dysfunction follows.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">The heart is a four-chambered muscular organ located in the mediastinum, slightly left of midline. It is enclosed within the pericardium, a double-layered sac consisting of a fibrous outer layer and a serous inner layer with a small amount of lubricating fluid between them. The wall of the heart has three layers: the endocardium, which lines the chambers; the myocardium, composed of cardiac muscle responsible for contraction; and the epicardium, the outermost layer. The myocardium of the left ventricle is significantly thicker than that of the right ventricle because it must generate higher pressure to propel blood through systemic circulation.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">The right side of the heart functions as a low-pressure pump that sends deoxygenated blood to the lungs. Deoxygenated blood from systemic circulation returns to the right atrium via the superior and inferior vena cava. From the right atrium, blood flows through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle during diastole. When the right ventricle contracts, blood is ejected through the pulmonary valve into the pulmonary arteries and directed toward the lungs for gas exchange.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">The left side of the heart is a high-pressure pump that supplies oxygenated blood to the body. Oxygenated blood returns from the lungs via the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. It passes through the mitral valve into the left ventricle. During ventricular systole, the left ventricle contracts forcefully and ejects blood through the aortic valve into the aorta, which distributes blood to systemic arteries. The structural difference between the right and left ventricles reflects the difference in resistance between pulmonary and systemic circulation.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">The cardiac cycle refers to the sequence of mechanical and electrical events that occur with each heartbeat. It consists of systole, when the ventricles contract and eject blood, and diastole, when the ventricles relax and fill. Ventricular filling occurs primarily during diastole when the atrioventricular valves are open. Late diastole includes atrial contraction, sometimes called the atrial kick, which contributes approximately 10 to 20 percent of ventricular filling in a healthy heart. Loss of atrial contraction, as seen in atrial fibrillation, can reduce cardiac output, especially in patients with stiff ventricles.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">During ventricular systole, rising ventricular pressure causes the tricuspid and mitral valves to close, producing the first heart sound, S1. When ventricular pressure exceeds pressure in the pulmonary artery and aorta, the semilunar valves open and blood is ejected. At the end of systole, ventricular pressure falls. When arterial pressure exceeds ventricular pressure, the pulmonary and aortic valves close, producing the second heart sound, S2. Diastole then begins again with ventricular relaxation and filling.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Electrical activity precedes mechanical contraction. The cardiac conduction system coordinates this sequence to ensure efficient pumping. The sinoatrial node, located in the right atrium near the superior vena cava, is the natural pacemaker of the heart. It has automaticity, meaning it can spontaneously depolarize. Its intrinsic rate is 60 to 100 beats per minute. The impulse spreads across the atria, causing atrial contraction, and reaches the atrioventricular node. The AV node briefly delays conduction, allowing time for ventricular filling before ventricular contraction. From the AV node, the impulse travels through the Bundle of His, down the right and left bundle branches, and into the Purkinje fibers, which distribute the impulse throughout the ventricular myocardium. Coordinated depolarization ensures synchronized ventricular contraction.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Cardiac output is the volume of blood pumped by the heart per minute and is calculated as heart rate multiplied by stroke volume. Stroke volume is influenced by preload, afterload, and contractility. Preload refers to ventricular filling and stretch at end-diastole. According to the Frank-Starling mechanism, increased preload within physiological limits results in stronger contraction. Afterload is the resistance the ventricle must overcome to eject blood, largely determined by systemic vascular resistance. Contractility refers to the intrinsic strength of myocardial contraction independent of preload. Alterations in any of these factors affect perfusion.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Blood vessels are organized into a hierarchical system designed for pressure regulation and exchange. Arteries carry blood away from the heart under high pressure. Their thick muscular and elastic walls allow them to withstand and modulate pulsatile flow. Elastic arteries such as the aorta expand during systole and recoil during diastole, helping maintain continuous blood flow. Muscular arteries distribute blood to specific regions.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Arterioles are resistance vessels and play a major role in regulating systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure. Smooth muscle within arteriolar walls responds to neural, hormonal, and local metabolic signals. Vasoconstriction increases resistance and blood pressure, while vasodilation decreases resistance and enhances tissue perfusion.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Capillaries are the smallest vessels and consist of a single layer of endothelial cells. Their thin walls allow diffusion of oxygen, carbon dioxide, glucose, electrolytes, and waste products. Exchange occurs primarily through diffusion driven by concentration gradients, as well as through filtration influenced by hydrostatic and oncotic pressures. Capillary density varies by tissue metabolic demand.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Venules collect blood from capillary beds and merge into veins. Veins operate under low pressure and have thinner walls compared to arteries. They contain valves that prevent backflow, particularly in the lower extremities. Venous return depends on skeletal muscle contraction, respiratory pressure changes, and sympathetic tone. Impaired venous return can lead to venous stasis and edema.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Coronary circulation supplies oxygen and nutrients to the myocardium itself. The left coronary artery divides into the left anterior descending artery, which supplies the anterior wall and septum, and the circumflex artery, which supplies the lateral wall. The right coronary artery supplies the right ventricle and often the inferior wall of the left ventricle. Obstruction of these arteries leads to myocardial ischemia and infarction. Because the myocardium extracts a high percentage of oxygen at baseline, increased oxygen demand must be met primarily by increased coronary blood flow.</p><p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">The cardiovascular system functions as an integrated pump and distribution network. Its effectiveness depends on coordinated electrical conduction, efficient mechanical contraction, intact valves, adequate vascular tone, and sufficient circulating volume. Disruption at any point, whether electrical, structural, or vascular, compromises perfusion and threatens organ function. Understanding these principles allows clinicians to interpret heart sounds, ECG findings, blood pressure changes, and signs of shock as manifestations of underlying physiology rather than isolated abnormalities.</p>

The cardiac cycle includes two phases: systole (contraction) and diastole (relaxation). During ventricular systole, the AV valves (tricuspid and mitral) close, producing the S1 heart sound ('lub'), while the semilunar valves (pulmonary and aortic) open to allow blood ejection. During diastole, the semilunar valves close (producing S2, the 'dub' sound), and the AV valves open for ventricular filling. The cardiac conduction system: consisting of the SA node, AV node, Bundle of His, bundle branches, and Purkinje fibers: coordinates this electrical activity. The SA node, located in the right atrium, is the natural pacemaker with an intrinsic rate of 60-100 beats per minute.

<p style="white-space: normal; caret-color: rgb(0, 0, 0); color: rgb(0, 0, 0);">Blood vessels form a continuous, highly specialized network designed to transport blood efficiently under varying pressure conditions while allowing selective exchange at the tissue level. They are structurally and functionally classified as arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins. Each category has distinct anatomical features that correspond directly to its physiological role in maintaining perfusion and regulatin